# Cvičenie 11

## Object-relational mappers (SQLAlchemy)

#### Relevantná dokumentácia:

* [Object Relational Mappers (ORMs)](https://www.fullstackpython.com/object-relational-mappers-orms.html)
* [SQLAlchemy installation instructions](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/intro.html#install-via-pip)
* [SQLAlchemy ORM quick start guide](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/orm/quickstart.html)
* [SQLAlchemy core guide](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/index.html)
* [SQLAlchemy full tutorial](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/tutorial/index.html#unified-tutorial)
* [Strengths and weaknesses of SQLAlchemy](https://python.plainenglish.io/sqlalchemy-vs-raw-sql-queries-in-python-a-comparative-example-b7a838ebef82)

Object-relational mappers (ORMs) are a complicated topic because they need to cover most aspects of the underlying DBMS.
In addition, they usually provide means for _database migrations_ ([example: Django](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/migrations/)).

The first few encounters with an ORM like Django or SQLAlchemy might leave you confused, full of questions instead of answers, or feeling like you can't reliably write any code. That would be no surprise --- there are at least 3 very
different ways of writing queries and defining tables in SQLAlchemy, so advice found on the internet might not be consistent with what you are trying to write. Don't worry, your task is to get an overview of ORM capabilities
and at least a shallow understanding of the means of how to get simple database tasks done.

### SQLAlchemy

Note: We will use version 2.0. The easiest way to install it is

    pip install SQLAlchemy==2.0.23

SQLAlchemy offers two different ways of working with a database (in addition to them, you can execute "hand-written" SQL via SQLAlchemy).

1. Lower-level [Core API](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/core/index.html) in which you write db queries yourself and express things in database terms (though not in SQL). An example:

        from sqlalchemy import MetaData, Table, Column, Integer, String, select, func, create_engine, insert

        metadata = MetaData()
        user = Table(
            "user",
            metadata,
            Column("user_id", Integer, primary_key=True),
            Column("user_name", String(16), nullable=False),
            Column("nickname", String(50), nullable=False),
        )

        engine = create_engine("sqlite://", echo=True)
        metadata.create_all(engine)

        insertStatement = insert(user).values(
            user_name='spongebob', nickname='Spongebob Squarepants'
        )

        query = select(
            user.c.nickname, func.count(user.c.user_id)
        ).where(
            user.c.user_name.in_(["spongebob", "sandy"])
        ).group_by(
            user.c.nickname
        )

        with engine.connect() as conn:
            conn.execute(insertStatement)
            for row in conn.execute(query):
                print(row)

2. High-level [object-relational mapper](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/orm/quickstart.html)
where you express things in terms of the domain you are working with (using Python classes).
The various relationships between database entities are expressed using object fields
and constructs like `relationship` (check [an example of one-to-many relationship representation](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/orm/basic_relationships.html#one-to-many)).
An example showing how to create objects:

        from sqlalchemy import create_engine, String, select, func
        from sqlalchemy.orm import Mapped, mapped_column, DeclarativeBase, Session

        class Base(DeclarativeBase):
            pass

        class User(Base):
            __tablename__ = "user"
            user_id: Mapped[int] = mapped_column(primary_key=True)
            user_name: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String(16), nullable=False)
            nickname: Mapped[str] = mapped_column(String(50), nullable=False)

            def __repr__(self) -> str:
                return f"User(user_id={self.user_id!r}, user_name={self.user_name!r}, nickname={self.nickname!r})"

        engine = create_engine("sqlite://", echo=True)
        Base.metadata.create_all(engine)

        with Session(engine) as session:
            spongebob = User(
                user_name="spongebob",
                nickname="Spongebob Squarepants",
            )
            session.add_all([spongebob])
            session.commit()

            query = select(
                User.nickname, func.count(User.user_id)
            ).where(
                User.user_name.in_(["spongebob", "sandy"])
            ).group_by(
                User.nickname
            )

            for r in session.execute(query):
                print(r)

The two examples given above are supposed to run correctly in Python3 with SQLAlchemy properly installed.
They will print the generated SQL statements and also some other information logged by SQLAlchemy.
You might want to modify them a bit and watch the results. Try to write a [query with join](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/orm/quickstart.html#select-with-join) (it does not need to have a deep meaning, just join a table to itself and add some join condition).

Note: There are some `ROLLBACK` statements where you would not expect them (e.g. after a SELECT query).
Ignore them, the are related to [connection pooling](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/faq/connections.html#why-does-sqlalchemy-issue-so-many-rollbacks).


## Tasks

Use in-memory SQLite for the following tasks.

1. Express the following SQL tables using the ORM class declarations
and create the tables through `Base.metadata.create_all`.

        CREATE TABLE department (
            deptno INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
            name VARCHAR(50),
            location VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL
        );

        CREATE TABLE employee (
            empno INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
            name VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
            job VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
            deptno INTEGER NOT NULL REFERENCES department
        );

2. Create objects representing a department with two employees and save them to the db using `Session.add_all`.

3. Make sure you have set relationships correctly: can you see foreign keys in the generated SQL statements?
Try setting appropriate [ON DELETE cascade for the foreign keys](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/20/orm/cascades.html#using-foreign-key-on-delete-cascade-with-orm-relationships).

4. Write some queries in Python using SQLAlchemy's `select()`:
    * Jobs of employees working in Chicago, without repetition, ordered alphabetically.
    * Departments that are empty (have no employees).


## Instructions

Points are awarded for tasks 1 and 4 (1 pt each).

Send your Python program to `jan.mazak@fmph.uniba.sk` with subject `DAV-C-11`.
